Immigration was the centerpiece of his campaign, and 100 days into his presidency, enforcing immigration laws is one area where President Donald Trump already can claim some victories.
While Trump has yet to achieve a single major legislative accomplishment, Trump has managed to make a palpable difference on US immigration policy.
Trump's oft-promised wall along the border with Mexico is still without funding, and the courts have blocked implementation of other measures Trump has tried to put in place.
Trump moved quickly to deliver on his promise to free immigration enforcers to crack down on undocumented immigrants.
In both February and March, the number of apprehensions of individuals illegally crossing the southwest border dropped sharply.

Going back to 2000, not a single February or March brought a decline in apprehensions, much less a roughly 40% drop as both months brought in 2017.
While a variety of factors influence the flow of immigrants up through Mexico, experts attribute at least some of the drop to Trump's hardline position on immigration.
In addition to border crossings, early data from US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) also shows an uptick in arrests of undocumented immigrants in the US .
ICE removal authorities made 21,362 arrests. Though those numbers lag behind the Obama administration's peak, they are a substantial increase over the last two years of President Barack Obama's time in office.
One of Trump's first actions to make good on his pledge to crack down on immigration was the nomination of Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions, to be attorney general. Trump added Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly to the administration, as well.
In Trump's first week, he signed three executive orders taking a hard line on immigration.
Some pieces remain to be implemented, including construction of the border wall and the hiring of 10,000 new immigration officers and 5,000 new border patrol agents. 
the priorities for arresting undocumented immigrants in the US could include virtually every one of the estimated 11 million individuals living in the US without authorization.
One of the orders gave broad discretion to individual ICE agents and offices to determine what constitutes a threat to public safety.
One campaign pledge Trump has broken has been leaving intact Obama's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has continued to issue permits under the program, which requires a background check.
Sessions also sent guidance to federal prosecutors that could mean the Department of Justice will be going after undocumented immigrants more aggressively with criminal prosecutions.
Despite asking for billions of dollars to begin constructing the wall, Congress is set to pass a government funding bill that runs through the fall that will not allocate any money to the border wall.
the early request from the Trump administration for $1 billion toward the wall covered only 62 miles. Of that, only 48 miles was for new barriers, with 14 miles being replacement.
The latest slap from a federal judge was on Tuesday, when a district court in San Francisco blocked the Trump administration from implementing a piece of one of his executive orders that threatened to take federal funds away from sanctuary cities. 
the judge ruled that the government could not take away federal funds from cities as an effort to coerce them to cooperate with federal immigration enforcement.
The first case came from the same judicial region -- with the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals upholding a block on Trump's effort to bar immigrants from certain high-risk countries and limit refugees.
That ruling forced the Trump administration back to the drawing board, but multiple federal judges again placed a block on instituting the order's second incarnation.